1,2-Dibromoethane
1,2-Dibromoethane, also known as ethylene dibromide (EDB), is an organobromine compound with the chemical formula . Although trace amounts occur naturally in the ocean, where it is probably formed by algae and kelp, substantial amounts are produced industrially. It is a dense colorless liquid with a faint, sweet odor, detectable at 10 ppm. It is a widely used and sometimes-controversial fumigant. The combustion of 1,2-dibromoethane produces hydrogen bromide gas that is significantly corrosive.
Preparation and use
It is produced by the reaction of ethylene gas with bromine, in a classic halogen addition reaction:
CH=CH + Br → BrCH–CHBr
Historically, 1,2-dibromoethane was used as a component in anti-knock additives in leaded fuels. It reacts with lead residues to generate volatile lead bromides, thereby preventing fouling of the engine with lead deposits.
Pesticide
It has been used as a pesticide in soil and on various crops.  The applications were initiated after the forced retirement of 1,2-dibromo-3-chloropropane (DBCP).  Most of these uses have been stopped in the U.S. It continues to be used as a fumigant for treatment of logs for termites and beetles, and for control of moths in beehives.
Reagent
1,2-Dibromoethane has wider applications in the preparation of other organic compounds including those carrying modified diazocine rings and vinyl bromide that is a precursor to some fire retardants.
In organic synthesis, 1,2-dibromoethane is used to brominate carbanions and to activate magnesium for certain Grignard reagents. In the latter process, 1,2-dibromoethane reacts with magnesium, producing ethylene and magnesium bromide, which are innocuous, exposing a more active portion of the magnesium particle to the substrate.
Health effects
1,2-Dibromoethane causes changes in the metabolism and severe destruction of living tissues. The known empirical LD50 values for 1,2-dibromoethane are 140 mg kg−1 (oral, rat), and 300.0 mg kg−1 (dermal, rabbit). 1,2-Dibromoethane is a known carcinogen, with pre-1977 exposure levels ranking it as the most carcinogenic substance on the HERP Index.
The effects on people of breathing high levels are not known, but animal studies with short-term exposures to high levels caused depression and collapse, indicating effects on the brain. Changes in the brain and behavior were also seen in young rats whose male parents had breathed 1,2-dibromoethane, and birth defects were observed in the young of animals that were exposed while pregnant. 1,2-Dibromoethane is not known to cause birth defects in humans. Swallowing has caused death at 40ml doses.
References
External links
National Pollutant Inventory 1,2-Dibromoethane Fact Sheet
Congressional Research Service (CRS) Reports regarding Ethylene Dibromide
ATSDR ToxFAQs
CDC – NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards
1,3-Difluoro-2-propanol
1,3-Difluoro-2-propanol is a metabolic poison which disrupts the citric acid cycle and is used as a rodenticide, similar to sodium fluoroacetate. It is the main ingredient (along with 1-chloro-3-fluoro-2-propanol) in the rodenticide product Gliftor which was widely used in the former USSR and still approved in China.
References
2,4,5-Trichlorophenol
2,4,5-Trichlorophenol (TCP) is an organochloride with the molecular formula C6H3Cl3O. It has been used as a fungicide and herbicide. Precursor chemical used in the production of 2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4,5-T) and hexachlorophene involves the intermediate production of 2,4,5-trichlorophenol (TCP) and the formation of 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD, commonly referred to simply as dioxin) as an unwanted by-product. In the course of purifying the hexachlorophene, still bottom wastes were created with concentrated levels of TCP and dioxin.
References
Cited sources
See also
Agent Orange
2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxyacetic acid
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid
2,4-Dinitrophenol
2,4-Dinitrophenol (2,4-DNP or simply DNP) is an organic compound with the formula HOC6H3(NO2)2. It has been used in explosives manufacturing and as a pesticide and herbicide.
In humans, DNP causes dose-dependent mitochondrial uncoupling, causing the rapid loss of ATP as heat and leading to uncontrolled hyperthermia—up to —and death in case of overdose. Researchers noticed its effect on raising the basal metabolic rate in accidental exposure and developed it as one of the first weight loss drugs in the early twentieth century. DNP was banned from human use by the end of the 1930s due to its risk of death and toxic side effects. DNP continues to be used after its ban and experienced a resurgence in popularity after it became available on the Internet.
Chemical properties
thumb|upright=1.3|Synthesis of DNP (right) from phenol and nitric acid via 2-Nitrophenol and 4-Nitrophenol
DNP has the chemical formula HOC6H3(NO2)2. As a solid, it is a yellow, crystalline and has a sweet, musty odor. It sublimates, is volatile with steam, and is soluble in most organic solvents as well as aqueous alkaline solutions. DNP is a member of the dinitrophenols chemical family.
DNP can be produced by hydrolysis of 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene. Other routes of DNP synthesis include  nitration of monochlorobenzene, nitration of benzene with nitrogen dioxide and mercurous nitrate, oxidation of 1,3-dinitrobenzene, and nitration of phenol with nitric acid.
A dust explosion is possible with DNP in powder or granular form in the presence of air. DNP may explosively decompose when submitted to shock, friction or concussion, and may explode upon heating. DNP forms explosive salts with strong bases as well as ammonia, and emits toxic fumes of nitrogen dioxide when heated to decomposition. DNP's explosive strength is 81% that of TNT, based on the Trauzl lead block test.
Uses
Industrial
Historically, DNP has been used as an antiseptic and as a non-selective bioaccumulating pesticide.
DNP was particularly useful as a herbicide alongside other closely related dinitrophenol herbicides like 2,4-dinitro-o-cresol (DNOC), dinoseb and dinoterb. Since 1998 DNP has been withdrawn from agricultural use. Currently, there are no actively registered pesticides containing DNP in the United States or Europe. Dinoseb is used industrially as a polymerisation inhibitor during styrene production. In 2023, the Home Office said it could not determine any legitimate industrial uses for DNP in the United Kingdom.
It is a chemical intermediate in the production of sulfur dyes,Gerald Booth "Nitro Compounds, Aromatic" in "Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry" 2007; Wiley-VCH, Weinheim.  wood preservatives and picric acid. A precursor to 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT), DNP has also been used to make photographic developers and explosives. DNP is classified as an explosive in the United Kingdom and the United States.
In humans
thumb|upright=0.9|Histogram of DNP doses reported on online forums and the subreddit /r/DNP
DNP raises energy expenditure by 30 to 40 percent and causes a weight loss of  per week. Although DNP is no longer in clinical use as a weight loss drug due to its dangerous side effects, its mechanism of action remains under investigation as a potential approach for treating obesity and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Researchers developed a prodrug, HU6, which is metabolized to DNP in the liver to provide more stable blood concentrations. HU6 completed a phase II trial in which it produced significant reductions in liver fat and body weight in overweight people with elevated liver fat, without serious adverse effects.
DNP is used by bodybuilders, fitness enthusiasts, and people with an eating disorder to lose weight. The user profile is similar to that of anabolic steroids; many perceive it to be effective and with manageable risks. Despite health warnings from regulators, DNP is readily available online sometimes under other names such as Dinosan, Dnoc, Solfo Black, Nitrophen, Aldifen, and Chemox. DNP is often sold in tablets containing 100 to 200 mg and may be sold alongside other substances such as anabolic steroids and thyroxine. It may also be found as a contaminant in other bodybuilding supplements not advertised as containing DNP. Online message boards provide information on dosage and regimens for DNP use, and describe the risks of taking the compound and provide advice on how to mitigate hyperthermia. According to a study published in 2023, the most commonly reported doses were between 150 and 300 mg/day.  Between 2010 and 2020, reports of overdoses were higher in Australasia, Europe and North America than in Asia, Africa, and South or Central America.
It is also used as a suicide method.
Biochemistry
Mechanism of action
thumb|Nitro reduction of DNP
In living cells, DNP acts as a protonophore, an agent that can shuttle protons (hydrogen cations) across biological membranes. It dissipates the proton gradient across the mitochondrial membrane, collapsing the proton motive force that the cell uses to produce most of its ATP chemical energy. Instead of producing ATP, the energy of the proton gradient is lost as heat. The inefficiency is proportional to the dose of DNP that is taken. As the dose increases and energy production is made more inefficient, metabolic rate increases (and more fat is burned) in order to compensate for the inefficiency and to meet energy demands. DNP is probably the best known agent for uncoupling oxidative phosphorylation. The phosphorylation of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) by ATP synthase gets disconnected or uncoupled from oxidation.
DNP raises the basal metabolic rate (BMR) and lowers T4 (thyroid hormone) levels by increasing T4 metabolism and reducing thyroid hormone secretion. Because it binds to thyroxine-binding globulin, overall thyroid function may not be affected. DNP cannot substitute for thyroid hormone in myxedema.
Pharmacokinetics
Information about pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of DNP in humans is limited. DNP is metabolized via nitro reduction. Its major metabolites are  and  4-amino-2-nitrophenol. In overdoses, symptom onset can be as soon as 3 hours and the average time to death was 14 hours.
As a pollutant
Although many militaries are replacing traditional 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT)-based explosives for insensitive munitions, DNP is a degradation byproduct of the IMX-101 insensitive munition used by the United States Army.
While the Meisenheimer charge transfer reaction is effective at detecting TNT, it is not effective at detecting many other explosives including DNP. Researchers are studying colorimetric detection and other methods for DNP to find if water or solids such as soils are contaminated with DNP. UiO-66-NH2 can be used to bind to and remove DNP from solution.
Adverse effects
DNP has a low therapeutic index, meaning that the dosage at which toxicity occurs is not much larger than that required to produce a desired effect.  Individual tolerance to DNP's harmful short- and long-term effects varies greatly. The most common adverse effect reported is a rash, which could be maculopapular, urticarial, angioedema, or an exfoliative dermatitis. Cataracts can form, causing a permanent loss of vision in days to months of usage, and permanent deafness has also been reported. Other adverse effects reported include peripheral neuritis, agranulocytosis, and neutropaenia. Negative effects on the central nervous system, cardiovascular system, and bone marrow can occur. In animal studies, DNP acted as a teratogen, mutagen, and carcinogen and caused developmental and reproductive harm.  An unusually yellow coloring of the skin, mucous membranes, sclera, urine, stomach contents, and internal organs is an indication of DNP exposure, but does not occur in every case. Contact with skin or inhalation can cause DNP poisoning. Symptoms are typically mild with dermal exposure, but inhalation can lead to systemic effects, the same way as oral exposure.
Overdose
Overdose is extremely dangerous; cases reported to poison control centers had a 11.9 percent fatality rate between 2010 and 2020. Although the largest number of overdose deaths occurred in the 1910s and 1920s when the chemical was in more widespread industrial use, the substance's use as a dieting aid has caused a number of fatalities in the twenty-first century: at least 50 overdose deaths were reported worldwide between 2010 and 2020.  Although the lowest published fatal ingested dose is 4.3 mg/kg, a typical overdose death occurs at a higher level of exposure, around 20-50 mg/kg.
The first symptoms to appear are nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and perhaps diarrhea. The typical overdose syndrome seen with DNP and other phenols is a combination of hyperthermia, tachycardia, diaphoresis, and tachypnoea. Because of the heat produced during uncoupling, DNP overdose will overpower the body's attempt to maintain thermal homeostasis and cause an uncontrolled, fatal rise in body temperature up to as high as . The disruption of metabolism also leads to the accumulation of potassium and phosphate, potentially contributing to toxicity. DNP can cause T wave and ST segment abnormalities; heart muscle, kidney, and liver damage have been found on autopsy. According to an analysis of United Kingdom and United States overdose cases, tachycardia, hyperpyrexia, acidosis, and agitation or confusion are independent predictors of overdose death.
There is no antidote to DNP and management strategies are based on expert opinion and case studies. Treatment for overdose is supportive, and often involves aggressive cooling using methods such as ice baths and intravenous fluids. Grundlingh et al. recommend administering activated charcoal if the patient presents within an hour of ingestion and using intravenous vasopressors or inotropes to control blood pressure if necessary. Intravenous methylthioninium chloride can treat methaemoglobinaemia. Benzodiazepines can help control seizures and dantrolene has been used in an attempt to control hyperthemia. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) has been used on people who died of DNP overdoses but has no known successful outcomes.
History
During World War I, munitions workers in France fell ill and some died from DNP exposure. Stanford University academic Maurice L. Tainter learned of DNP's effect in raising the metabolic rate and causing weight loss and pioneered its use as a weight loss drug. Although he was aware of DNP's narrow therapeutic index, Tainter tried the drugs on obese patients and published successful results in 1933; average weight loss was  and most recipients did not report adverse effects. In 1934, Tainter estimated that at least 100,000 people had been treated with DNP in the United States during its first year on the market and there had been three reported fatalities connected to the drug. Tainter argued that DNP was highly effective in raising the metabolic rate (up to 50 percent) and avoided the negative circulatory effects of desiccated thyroid, another weight loss drug in use at the time.
upright=1.3|thumb|DNP explainer in the FDA publication "Chamber of Horrors"
Other physicians were less optimistic about the adverse effects of DNP, and in 1935 the  American Medical Association's Council on Chemistry and Pharmacy declined to list DNP in the New and Nonofficial Remedies on the grounds that its benefits did not exceed its risks to health. Reports of cataracts forming during DNP usage administered by a physician appeared the same year; in 1936 an ophthalmologist based in San Francisco estimated that 2,500 American women had gone blind from DNP use. Physician opinion turned against the drug, but many people bought direct-to-consumer preparations of DNP—marketed as a cosmetic rather than a drug to evade existing regulations.
DNP's risks were highlighted in the "Chamber of Horrors", an exhibit assembled by the Food and Drug Administration to explain the limitations of existing American drug regulations. In 1938, the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act increased the FDA's ability to regulate drugs. DNP was deemed so toxic as to be banned for human consumption and in 1940 the FDA reported that there was no evidence of continued sale for this purpose. Nevertheless, it continued to be used for weight loss. William F. Loomis and Fritz Albert Lipmann discovered DNP's mechanism of action and reported it in a 1948 publication.
Reports of its use increased in the twenty-first century after the drug became available on the Internet.
Legal status
DNP is banned for human consumption in many countries. Because it has some legitimate uses, in many jurisdictions, DNP is legal to sell, but not for human consumption. In Australia, all dinitrophenols were classified as Schedule 1 dangerous drugs in 1956. In February 2017, DNP was reclassified as Schedule 10, "Substances of such a danger to health as to warrant prohibition of sale, supply and use". Since 1 October 2023, DNP has been classified as a regulated poison in the United Kingdom. It is a prohibited substance (class F4) in Brazil. In the United States, DNP is classified as an investigational new drug; it received orphan drug status for Huntington's disease. DNP has been banned by the World Anti-Doping Association since 2015.
Petróczi et al. recommend against campaigns informing people of the risks of DNP because it could increase use of the drug. However, Sousa et al. argue that publicity campaigns in the United Kingdom in the early and mid-2010s reduced DNP usage. In 2015, Interpol and the World Anti-Doping Agency released an orange notice warning of the dangers of DNP.
In 1941, the Eastman Kodak Company, a bulk distributor of DNP, was investigated after some of its product was found in illegal diet pills. Nicholas Bachynsky, a Texas physician, provided the drug to patients under the name "Mitcal". He was convicted of violating drug laws in 1986, but continued to work with DNP  and was additionally convicted of fraud in 2008. In 2018, a seller in the United Kingdom was convicted of manslaughter for selling DNP for human consumption. The conviction was sent to retrial in 2020 by the English Court of Appeal, where the seller was, once again, convicted of gross negligence manslaughter.
References
Further reading
Athlete dies at the 2025 Arnold Classic
2-Fluoroethanol
2-Fluoroethanol is the organic compound with the formula CH2FCH2OH. This colorless liquid is one of the simplest stable fluorinated alcohols. It was once used as a pesticide. The related difluoro- and trifluoroethanols are far less dangerous.
Synthesis
2-Fluoroethanol was originally synthesized by treating 2-chloroethanol with potassium fluoride, in a simple Finkelstein reaction. The product has a lower boiling point that the starting material and may be conveniently isolated by distillation.
ClCH2CH2OH + KF → FCH2CH2OH + KCl
Similar procedures start from (1,3)-dioxolan-2-one and from 2-bromoethanol.
Structure and reactivity
Hydrogen bonding stabilizes the gauche conformer.
In a basic solution, 2-fluoroethanol undergoes dehydrofluorination, giving acetaldehyde.
Reaction of 2-fluoroethanol with trifluoromethanesulfonic anhydride in the presence of base gives the triflate ester.
PET radiotracers
2-[18F]-fluoroethoxy group is a common moiety in the structures of radiotracers used with PET. Such radiotracers include fluoroethyl-l-tyrosine 1-(2-[18F]-fluoroethoxy)-4-nitrobenzene and [18F]-fluoroethyl 4-fluorobenzoate, being a [18F]fluoroalkyl ether and ester respectively.Pan, J., Pourghiasian, M., Hundal, N., Lau, J., Bénard, F., Dedhar, S., & Lin, K.-S. (2013). 2-[18F]-fluoroethanol and 3-[18F]-fluoropropanol: facile preparation, biodistribution in mice, and their application as nucleophiles in the synthesis of [18F]fluoroalkyl aryl ester and ether PET tracers. Nuclear Medicine and Biology, 40(6), 850–857. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2013.04.009Falzon, C. L., Ackermann, U., Spratt, N., Tochon-Danguy, H. J., White, J., Howells, D., & Scott, A. M. (2006).F-18 labelledN,N-bis-haloethylamino-phenylsulfoxides — a new class of compounds for the imaging of hypoxic tissue. Journal of Labelled Compounds and Radiopharmaceuticals, 49(12), 1089–1103. https://doi.org/10.1002/jlcr.1129
Metabolism
It was patented as a rodenticide in Germany in 1935.Treble D. H. (1962). The metabolism of 2-fluoroethanol. The Biochemical journal, 82(1), 129–134. https://doi.org/10.1042/bj0820129 In rats, it was found that fluoroethanol induced a similar toxicity as that of fluoroacetate, known to metabolize to fluorocitrate to exert the toxic effect.
2-Fluoroethanol is converted by alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) using nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) as cofactor, ultimately leading to the formation of fluoroacetaldehyde and then fluoroacetate.
Fluoroacetate is a precursor to fluorocitrate,Goncharov, N. V., Jenkins, R. O., & Radilov, A. S. (2006). Toxicology of fluoroacetate: a review, with possible directions for therapy research. Journal of applied toxicology : JAT, 26(2), 148–161. https://doi.org/10.1002/jat.1118 an inhibitor of aconitase, an enzyme that participates in the TCA cycle.Timbrell, J. A. (2008). Principles of Biochemical Toxicology (Fourth Edition). Taylor & Francis. p. 358-359.
Toxicity
Reported effects of 2-fluoroethanol are epigastric distress effects, such as vomiting, and central nervous effects, such as auditory hallucinations, numbness feeling of the face or nose. Both these types of effects occur gradually after being exposed to 2-fluoroethanol for several hours. Some more severe reactions of the human body to 2-fluoroethanol can be respiratory failure and epileptiform convulsions or seizures, leading to dysfunctions in the heart mechanism. From the early 20th century, there are multiple reports of deaths caused by 2-fluoroethanol.Saunders, B. C., Stacey, G. J., & Wilding, I. G. E. (1948). Toxic Fluorine Compounds Containing the C-F Link. Part II. 2-Fluoroethanol and its Derivatives. University Chemical Laboratory Cambridge, 1. Retrieved from https://pubs-rsc-org.ru.idm.oclc.org/en/content/articlepdf/1949/jr/jr9490000773.
2-Fluoroethanol is also toxic to other animals with LD50 ranging from 7 to 1500 mg/kg bodyweight.
See also
Sodium fluoroacetate
1,3-Difluoro-2-propanol
